[ACP-77] Adjust naming of txn types due to renaming of Avalanche Subnets -> Avalanche L1s (#154)
avalanche-foundation/ACPs: ACPs/77-reinventing-subnets/README.md

Elastic Subnets, introduced in [Banff](https://medium.com/avalancheavax/banff-elastic-subnets-44042f41e34c), enabled Subnet creators to activate Proof-of-Stake validation and uptime-based rewards using their own token. However, this token is required to be an ANT (created on the X-Chain) and locked on the P-Chain. All staking rewards were distributed on the P-Chain with the reward curve being defined in the `TransformSubnetTx` and, once set, was unable to be modified.

With no Elastic Subnets live on Mainnet, it is clear that Permissionless Subnets as they stand today could be more desirable. There are many successful Permissioned Subnets in production but many Subnet creators have raised the above as points of concern. In summary, the Avalanche community could benefit from a more flexible and affordable mechanism to launch Permissionless Subnets.

### A Note on Nomenclature

> Going forward, newly created networks should be referred to as L1s, or Avalanche Layer 1s. L1 validator sets created using the flow introduced in this ACP will **not** be a subset of the Primary Network validator set, making Subnets a technical misnomer. Any network created with the pre-existing flow will still be considered a Subnet, as these types of validators must stake and validate the Avalanche Primary Network.
> 
> Though Subnets have always managed their own consensus mechanisms, transaction processing, and security protocols directly within their own networks, the added functionality introduced in this ACP will solidify their status as standalone networks, or layer 1 blockchains.

Reviewer: I'm finding it a bit difficult to discern the difference between Subnets and L1s with these paragraphs. My understanding is a network will still be considered an L1 and not a Subnet when there is an intersection between the network's validator set and the Primary Network's validator set.

I think the distinction needs to be a bit clearer. I took a stab at defining the difference between Subnets and L1s in a way that's clearer to me but feel free to re-word!

```suggestion
Avalanche Subnets are subnetworks validated by a subset of the Primary Network validator set. The new network creation flow outlined in this ACP does not require any intersection between the new network's validator set and the Primary Network's validator set. Moreover, the new networks have greater functionality and sovereignty than Subnets. To distinguish between these two kinds of networks, the community has been referring to these new networks as _Avalanche Layer 1s_, or L1s for short.

All networks created through the old network creation flow will continue to be referred to as Avalanche Subnets.
```

## Specification

> At a high-level, L1s can manage their validator sets externally to the P-Chain by setting the blockchain ID and address of their _validator manager_. The P-Chain will consume Warp messages that modify the L1's validator set. To confirm modification of the L1's validator set, the P-Chain will also produce Warp messages. L1 validators will no longer be required to validate the Primary Network, removing the 2000 $AVAX stake requirement previously imposed on Subnet validators. In place of the stake requirement, a continuous fee denominated in $AVAX is introduced to maintain an active L1 validator. L1 validators are only required to sync the P-Chain (not X/C-Chain) in order to track validator set changes and support cross-L1 communication.

Reviewer: nit: "previously imposed" suggests that we're no longer imposing it

made some edits to make that a bit clearer

```suggestion
At a high-level, L1s can manage their validator sets externally to the P-Chain by setting the blockchain ID and address of their _validator manager_. The P-Chain will consume Warp messages that modify the L1's validator set. To confirm modification of the L1's validator set, the P-Chain will also produce Warp messages. L1 validators are not required to validate the Primary Network, and do not have the same 2000 $AVAX stake requirement that Subnet validators have. To maintain an active L1 validator, a continuous fee denominated in $AVAX is assessed. L1 validators are only required to sync the P-Chain (not X/C-Chain) in order to track validator set changes and support cross-L1 communication.
```

> At a high-level, L1s can manage their validator sets externally to the P-Chain by setting the blockchain ID and address of their _validator manager_. The P-Chain will consume Warp messages that modify the L1's validator set. To confirm modification of the L1's validator set, the P-Chain will also produce Warp messages. L1 validators will no longer be required to validate the Primary Network, removing the 2000 $AVAX stake requirement imposed on Subnet validators. In place of the stake requirement, a continuous fee denominated in $AVAX is introduced to maintain an active Subnet validator. Subnet validators are only required to sync the P-Chain (not X/C-Chain) in order to track validator set changes and support cross-Subnet communication.

Author: Appreciate the thoroughness, I'm still going through the entire doc and plan to update it entirely so that we only use Subnet to refer to chains made pre-acp-77

### P-Chain Warp Message Payloads

> To enable management of an L1's validator set externally to the P-Chain, Warp message verification will be added to the [`PlatformVM`](https://github.com/ava-labs/avalanchego/tree/master/vms/platformvm). For a Warp message to be considered valid by the P-Chain, at least 67% of the `sourceChainID`'s weight must have participated in the aggregate BLS signature. This is equivalent to the threshold set for the C-Chain. A future ACP may be proposed to support modification of this threshold on a per-L1 basis.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To enable management of a L1's validator set externally to the P-Chain, Warp message verification will be added to the [`PlatformVM`](https://github.com/ava-labs/avalanchego/tree/master/vms/platformvm). For a Warp message to be considered valid by the P-Chain, at least 67% of the `sourceChainID`'s weight must have participated in the aggregate BLS signature. This is equivalent to the threshold set for the C-Chain. A future ACP may be proposed to support modification of this threshold on a per-L1 basis.
```

Author: > these indefinite articles are used [according to the sound](https://www.merriam-webster.com/grammar/is-it-a-or-an) that starts the following word, not the letter. So, we say “a dog” and “a balloon” or “an urgent message” and “an ant” but also “a useless pen” and “an hour.”

"L" said _out loud_ begins with a vowel sound; therefore the appropriate article is "an".
https://www.pristineword.com/a-an/#tit05

Reviewer: TIL

For messages produced by the P-Chain for a given Subnet, only that Subnet's validators must be willing to provide signatures, rather than the entire Primary Network validator set. This optimization is possible because all validators will still sync the P-Chain.

The following Warp message payloads are introduced on the P-Chain:

- `SubnetToL1ConversionMessage`
- `RegisterL1validatorMessage`
- `L1validatorRegistrationMessage`

> - `L1validatorWeightMessage`

Author: good catch

The following serialization is defined as the `ValidatorData`:

|          Field |       Type |                     Size |
| -------------: | ---------: | -----------------------: |
|       `nodeID` |   `[]byte` |  4 + len(`nodeID`) bytes |
| `blsPublicKey` | `[48]byte` |                 48 bytes |
|       `weight` |   `uint64` |                  8 bytes |
|                |            | 60 + len(`nodeID`) bytes |

The following serialization is defined as the `ConversionData`:

|            Field |              Type |                                                       Size |
| ---------------: | ----------------: | ---------------------------------------------------------: |
|        `codecID` |          `uint16` |                                                    2 bytes |
|       `subnetID` |        `[32]byte` |                                                   32 bytes |
| `managerChainID` |        `[32]byte` |                                                   32 bytes |
| `managerAddress` |          `[]byte` |                            4 + len(`managerAddress`) bytes |
|     `validators` | `[]ValidatorData` |                          4 + sum(`validatorLengths`) bytes |

> |                  |                   | 74 + len(`managerAddress`) + len(`validatorLengths`) bytes |

Reviewer 2: Unrelated change - but we should probably clean it up either here or in a follow-up.
```suggestion
|                  |                   | 74 + len(`managerAddress`) + sum(`validatorLengths`) bytes |
```

- `codecID` is the codec version used to serialize the payload, and is hardcoded to `0x0000`
- `sum(validatorLengths)` is the sum of the lengths of `ValidatorData` serializations included in `validators`.

> - `subnetID` identifies the Subnet that is being converted to an L1 (described further below).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `subnetID` identifies the Subnet that is being converted to a L1 (described further below).
```

Author: > these indefinite articles are used [according to the sound](https://www.merriam-webster.com/grammar/is-it-a-or-an) that starts the following word, not the letter. So, we say “a dog” and “a balloon” or “an urgent message” and “an ant” but also “a useless pen” and “an hour.”

"L" said _out loud_ begins with a vowel sound; therefore the appropriate article is "an".
https://www.pristineword.com/a-an/#tit05

> - `managerChainID` and `managerAddress` identify the validator manager for the L1 being converted. This is the (blockchain ID, address) tuple allowed to send Warp messages to modify the L1's validator set.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `managerChainID` and `managerAddress` identify the validator manager for the newly created L1. This is the (blockchain ID, address) tuple allowed to send Warp messages to modify the L1's validator set.
```

> - `validators` are the initial dynamic-fee-paying validators for the given L1.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `validators` are the initial continuous-fee-paying validators for the given L1.
```

|              `subnetID` |    `[32]byte` |                                                                  32 bytes |
|                `nodeID` |      `[]byte` |                                                   4 + len(`nodeID`) bytes |
|          `blsPublicKey` |    `[48]byte` |                                                                  48 bytes |
|                `expiry` |      `uint64` |                                                                   8 bytes |
| `remainingBalanceOwner` | `PChainOwner` |                                          8 + len(`addresses`) \* 20 bytes |
|          `disableOwner` | `PChainOwner` |                                          8 + len(`addresses`) \* 20 bytes |
|                `weight` |      `uint64` |                                                                   8 bytes |
|                         |               | 122 + len(`nodeID`) + (len(`addresses1`) + len(`addresses2`)) \* 20 bytes |

- `codecID` is the codec version used to serialize the payload, and is hardcoded to `0x0000`
- `typeID` is the payload type identifier and is `0x00000001` for this payload

> - `subnetID`, `nodeID`, `weight`, and `blsPublicKey` are for the validators being added

Reviewer: I think it's just one?

```suggestion
- `subnetID`, `nodeID`, `weight`, and `blsPublicKey` are for the validator being added
```

Author: yep good catch

The P-Chain can produce a `L1ValidatorRegistrationMessage` for consumers to verify that a validation period has either begun or has been invalidated.

The `L1ValidatorRegistrationMessage` is specified as an `AddressedCall` with `sourceChainID` set to the P-Chain ID, the `sourceAddress` set to an empty byte array, and a payload of:

|          Field |       Type |     Size |
| -------------: | ---------: | -------: |
|      `codecID` |   `uint16` |  2 bytes |
|       `typeID` |   `uint32` |  4 bytes |
| `validationID` | `[32]byte` | 32 bytes |
|   `registered` |     `bool` |   1 byte |
|                |            | 39 bytes |

- `codecID` is the codec version used to serialize the payload, and is hardcoded to `0x0000`
- `typeID` is the payload type identifier and is `0x00000002` for this message
- `validationID` identifies the validator for the message
- `registered` is a boolean representing the status of the `validationID`. If true, the `validationID` corresponds to a validator in the current validator set. If false, the `validationID` does not correspond to a validator in the current validator set, and never will in the future.

#### `L1ValidatorWeightMessage`

> The P-Chain can consume a `L1ValidatorWeightMessage` through a `SetL1ValidatorWeightTx` to update the weight of an existing validator. The P-Chain can also produce a `L1ValidatorWeightMessage` for consumers to verify that the validator weight update has been effectuated.

Reviewer: a `L1ValidatorWeightMessage` -> an `L1ValidatorWeightMessage`

(needs to be applied in a few places)

The following Warp message payloads are introduced on the P-Chain:

> - `L1ConversionMessage`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `SubnetToL1ConversionMessage`
```

- `RegisterL1ValidatorMessage`
- `L1ValidatorRegistrationMessage`
- `L1ValidatorWeightMessage`

The method of requesting signatures for these messages is left unspecified. A viable option for supporting this functionality is laid out in [ACP-118](../118-warp-signature-request/README.md) with the `SignatureRequest` message.

All node IDs contained within the message specifications are represented as variable length arrays such that they can support new node IDs types should the P-Chain add support for them in the future.

The serialization of each of these messages is as follows.

> #### `L1ConversionMessage`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#### `SubnetToL1ConversionMessage`
```

Author: good catch

> The P-Chain can produce a `L1ConversionMessage` for consumers (i.e. validator managers) to be aware of the initial validator set.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The P-Chain can produce a `SubnetToL1ConversionMessage` for consumers (i.e. validator managers) to be aware of the initial validator set.
```

The following serialization is defined as a `ValidatorData`:

|          Field |       Type |                     Size |
| -------------: | ---------: | -----------------------: |
|       `nodeID` |   `[]byte` |  4 + len(`nodeID`) bytes |
| `blsPublicKey` | `[48]byte` |                 48 bytes |
|       `weight` |   `uint64` |                  8 bytes |
|                |            | 60 + len(`nodeID`) bytes |

> The following serialization is defined as the `SubnetConversionData`:

Reviewer 2: Should this be renamed as well? `ConversionData`?

Author: ye

|        `codecID` |          `uint16` |                                                    2 bytes |
|       `subnetID` |        `[32]byte` |                                                   32 bytes |
| `managerChainID` |        `[32]byte` |                                                   32 bytes |
| `managerAddress` |          `[]byte` |                            4 + len(`managerAddress`) bytes |
|     `validators` | `[]ValidatorData` |                          4 + sum(`validatorLengths`) bytes |
|                  |                   | 74 + len(`managerAddress`) + len(`validatorLengths`) bytes |

- `codecID` is the codec version used to serialize the payload, and is hardcoded to `0x0000`
- `sum(validatorLengths)` is the sum of the lengths of `ValidatorData` serializations included in `validators`.
- `subnetID` identifies the Subnet that is being converted (described further below).
- `managerChainID` and `managerAddress` identify the validator manager for the given Subnet. This is the (blockchain ID, adress) tuple allowed to send Warp messages to modify the Subnet's validator set.
- `validators` are the initial pay-as-you-go validators for the given Subnet.

> The `L1ConversionMessage` is specified as an `AddressedCall` with `sourceChainID` set to the P-Chain ID, the `sourceAddress` set to an empty byte array, and a payload of:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `SubnetToL1ConversionMessage` is specified as an `AddressedCall` with `sourceChainID` set to the P-Chain ID, the `sourceAddress` set to an empty byte array, and a payload of:
```

|                Field |       Type |     Size |
| -------------------: | ---------: | -------: |
|            `codecID` |   `uint16` |  2 bytes |
|             `typeID` |   `uint32` |  4 bytes |

> | `subnetConversionID` | `[32]byte` | 32 bytes |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| `conversionID` | `[32]byte` | 32 bytes |
```

|                      |            | 38 bytes |

- `codecID` is the codec version used to serialize the payload, and is hardcoded to `0x0000`
- `typeID` is the payload type identifier and is `0x00000000` for this message

> - `subnetConversionID` is the SHA256 hash of the `SubnetConversionData` from a given `ConvertSubnetToL1Tx`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `conversionID` is the SHA256 hash of the `ConversionData` from a given `ConvertSubnetToL1Tx`
```

#### `RegisterL1ValidatorMessage`

The P-Chain can consume a `RegisterL1ValidatorMessage` from validator managers through a `RegisterL1ValidatorTx` to register an addition to the Subnet's validator set.

The following is the serialization of a `PChainOwner`:

|       Field |         Type |                             Size |
| ----------: | -----------: | -------------------------------: |
| `threshold` |     `uint32` |                          4 bytes |
| `addresses` | `[][20]byte` | 4 + len(`addresses`) \* 20 bytes |

> |             |              | 8 + len(`addresses`) \* 20 bytes |

Reviewer 2: (no change expected): Why was `*` changed to `\*`? Is this a best-practice for markdown to avoid bolding text by accident?

### New P-Chain Transaction Types

Both before and after this ACP, to create a Subnet, a `CreateSubnetTx` must be issued on the P-Chain. This transaction includes an `Owner` field which defines the key that today can be used to authorize any validator set additions (`AddSubnetValidatorTx`) or removals (`RemoveSubnetValidatorTx`).

To be a Permissionless Subnet:

- This `Owner` key must no longer have the ability to modify the Subnet's validator set
- New transaction types must support modification of a Subnet's validator set via Warp messages.

The following new transaction types are introduced on the P-Chain to support this functionality.

- `ConvertSubnetToL1Tx`
- `RegisterL1ValidatorTx`
- `SetL1ValidatorWeightTx`
- `DisableL1ValidatorTx`
- `IncreaseL1ValidatorBalanceTx`

#### `ConvertSubnetToL1Tx`

> To convert a Subnet from permissioned to permissionless, a `ConvertSubnetToL1Tx` must be issued to set the `(chainID, address)` pair that will manage the Subnet's validator set going forward. The `Owner` key defined in `CreateSubnetTx` must provide a signature to authorize this conversion.

Reviewer 2: Should this say:

> To convert a Subnet into an L1, ...

?

### New P-Chain Transaction Types

> Both before and after this ACP, to create a Subnet or an L1, a `CreateSubnetTx` must be issued on the P-Chain. This transaction includes an `Owner` field which defines the key that today can be used to authorize any validator set additions (`AddSubnetValidatorTx`) or removals (`RemoveSubnetValidatorTx`).

Reviewer: I believe it's considered a Subnet post-CreateSubnetTx and an L1 post-ConvertSubnetToL1Tx

```suggestion
To create a Subnet, a `CreateSubnetTx` must be issued on the P-Chain. This transaction includes an `Owner` field which defines the key that today can be used to authorize any validator set additions (`AddSubnetValidatorTx`) or removals (`RemoveSubnetValidatorTx`).
```

Author: this should be kept bc this part of the flow remains the same pre and post acp-77

> Both before and after this ACP, to create a Subnet or an L1, a `CreateSubnetTx` must be issued on the P-Chain. This transaction includes an `Owner` field which defines the key that today can be used to authorize any validator set additions (`AddSubnetValidatorTx`) or removals (`RemoveSubnetValidatorTx`).

Reviewer: I think saying "or an L1" undermines the distinction we're making

```suggestion
Both before and after this ACP, to create a Subnet, a `CreateSubnetTx` must be issued on the P-Chain. This transaction includes an `Owner` field which defines the key that today can be used to authorize any validator set additions (`AddSubnetValidatorTx`) or removals (`RemoveSubnetValidatorTx`).
```

> To be considered permissionless:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To be considered a permissionless network, or Avalanche Layer 1:
```

- This `Owner` key must no longer have the ability to modify the validator set.

> - New transaction types must support modification of an L1's validator set via Warp messages.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- New transaction types must support modification of the validator set via Warp messages.
```

> The following new transaction types are introduced on the P-Chain to support this functionality.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following new transaction types are introduced on the P-Chain to support this functionality:
```

- `ConvertSubnetToL1Tx`
- `RegisterL1ValidatorTx`
- `SetL1ValidatorWeightTx`
- `DisableL1ValidatorTx`
- `IncreaseL1ValidatorBalanceTx`

#### `ConvertSubnetToL1Tx`

> To convert a Subnet into an L1, a `ConvertSubnetToL1Tx` must be issued to set the `(chainID, address)` pair that will manage the L1's validator set going forward. The `Owner` key defined in `CreateSubnetTx` must provide a signature to authorize this conversion.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To convert a Subnet into a L1, a `ConvertSubnetToL1Tx` must be issued to set the `(chainID, address)` pair that will manage the L1's validator set. The `Owner` key defined in `CreateSubnetTx` must provide a signature to authorize this conversion.
```

> To convert a Subnet into an L1, a `ConvertSubnetToL1Tx` must be issued to set the `(chainID, address)` pair that will manage the L1's validator set going forward. The `Owner` key defined in `CreateSubnetTx` must provide a signature to authorize this conversion.

Reviewer: going forward sounds strange here

```suggestion
To convert a Subnet into an L1, a `ConvertSubnetToL1Tx` must be issued to set the `(chainID, address)` pair that will manage the L1's validator set. The `Owner` key defined in `CreateSubnetTx` must provide a signature to authorize this conversion.
```

    DisableOwner PChainOwner `json:"disableOwner"`
}

type ConvertSubnetToL1Tx struct {
    // Metadata, inputs and outputs
    BaseTx
    // ID of the Subnet to transform
    // Restrictions:
    // - Must not be the Primary Network ID

>     Subnet ids.ID `json:"subnetID"`

Author: Is there a reason this param is `Subnet` and not `SubnetID` ? @StephenButtolph

Reviewer 2: We can change it to `SubnetID`. It being named `Subnet` is an implementation detail of avalanchego.

    // BlockchainID where the validator manager lives
    ChainID ids.ID `json:"chainID"`
    // Address of the validator manager
    Address []byte `json:"address"`

>     // Initial set of validators for the L1

Reviewer: I think this should be modified to say something similar to continuous-fee-paying. We wouldn't be supplanting the existing validator set with the ones defined in this array.

Not married to "continuous-fee-paying," feel free to modify

```suggestion
    // Initial continuous-fee-paying validators for the L1
```

>     validators []L1Validator `json:"validators"`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Validators []L1Validator `json:"validators"`
```

    // Authorizes this conversion
    SubnetAuth verify.Verifiable `json:"subnetAuthorization"`
}
```

> After this transaction is accepted, `CreateChainTx` and `AddSubnetValidatorTx` are disabled on the Subnet. The only action that the `Owner` key is able to take is removing Subnet validators with `RemoveSubnetValidatorTx` that had been previously added using `AddSubnetValidatorTx`. Unless removed by the `Owner` key, any Subnet validators added previously with an `AddSubnetValidatorTx` will continue to validate the Subnet until their [`End`](https://github.com/ava-labs/avalanchego/blob/a1721541754f8ee23502b456af86fea8c766352a/vms/platformvm/txs/validator.go#L27) time is reached. Once all Subnet validators added with `AddSubnetValidatorTx` are no longer in the validator set, the `Owner` key is powerless. `RegisterL1ValidatorTx` and `SetL1ValidatorWeightTx` must be used to manage the L1's validator set going forward.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After this transaction is accepted, `CreateChainTx` and `AddSubnetValidatorTx` are disabled on the Subnet. The only action that the `Owner` key is able to take is removing Subnet validators with `RemoveSubnetValidatorTx` that had been added using `AddSubnetValidatorTx`. Unless removed by the `Owner` key, any Subnet validators added previously with an `AddSubnetValidatorTx` will continue to validate the Subnet until their [`End`](https://github.com/ava-labs/avalanchego/blob/a1721541754f8ee23502b456af86fea8c766352a/vms/platformvm/txs/validator.go#L27) time is reached. Once all Subnet validators added with `AddSubnetValidatorTx` are no longer in the validator set, the `Owner` key is powerless. `RegisterL1ValidatorTx` and `SetL1ValidatorWeightTx` must be used to manage the L1's validator set.
```

> The `validationID` for validators added through `ConvertSubnetToL1Tx` is defined as the SHA256 hash of the 36 bytes resulting from concatenating the 32 byte `subnetID` with the 4 byte `validatorIndex` (index in the `validators` array within the transaction).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `validationID` for validators added through `ConvertSubnetToL1Tx` is defined as the SHA256 hash of the 36 bytes resulting from concatenating the 32 byte `subnetID` with the 4 byte `validatorIndex` (index in the `Validators` array within the transaction).
```

Once this transaction is accepted, the P-Chain must be willing sign a `SubnetToL1ConversionMessage` with a `conversionID` corresponding to `ConversionData` populated with the values from this transaction.

#### `RegisterL1ValidatorTx`

> After a `ConvertSubnetToL1Tx` has been accepted, new validators must be added by using a `RegisterL1ValidatorTx`. The specification of this transaction is:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After a `ConvertSubnetToL1Tx` has been accepted, new validators can only be added by using a `RegisterL1ValidatorTx`. The specification of this transaction is:
```

    // Authorizes this conversion
    SubnetAuth verify.Verifiable `json:"subnetAuthorization"`
}
```

After this transaction is accepted, `CreateChainTx` and `AddSubnetValidatorTx` are disabled on the Subnet. The only action that the `Owner` key is able to take is removing Subnet validators that were added using `AddSubnetValidatorTx` previously via `RemoveSubnetValidatorTx`. Unless removed by the `Owner` key, any Subnet Validators added previously with an `AddSubnetValidatorTx` will continue to validate the Subnet until their [`End`](https://github.com/ava-labs/avalanchego/blob/a1721541754f8ee23502b456af86fea8c766352a/vms/platformvm/txs/validator.go#L27) time is reached. Once all Subnet Validators added with `AddSubnetValidatorTx` are no longer in the validator set, the `Owner` key is powerless. `RegisterL1ValidatorTx` and `SetL1ValidatorWeightTx` must be used to manage the Subnet's validator set going forward.

The `validationID` for validators added through `ConvertSubnetToL1Tx` is defined as the SHA256 hash of the 36 bytes resulting from concatenating the 32 byte `subnetID` with the 4 byte `validatorIndex` (index in the `Validators` array within the transaction).

> Once this transaction is accepted, the P-Chain must be willing sign a `L1ConversionMessage` with a `subnetConversionID` corresponding to `SubnetConversionData` populated with the values from this transaction.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Once this transaction is accepted, the P-Chain must be willing sign a `L1ConversionMessage` with a `conversionID` corresponding to `ConversionData` populated with the values from this transaction.
```

#### `RegisterL1ValidatorTx`

> After a `ConvertSubnetToL1Tx` has been accepted for a Subnet, new validators for the Subnet must be added by using a `RegisterL1ValidatorTx`. The specification of this transaction is:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After a `ConvertSubnetToL1Tx` has been accepted, new validators for the L1 must be added by using a `RegisterL1ValidatorTx`. The specification of this transaction is:
```
?

    //       This means that validators can share a key if they so choose.
    //       However, a NodeID does uniquely map to a BLS key
    Signer [96]byte `json:"signer"`
    // A RegisterL1ValidatorMessage payload
    Message warp.Message `json:"message"`
}
```

The `validationID` of validators added via `RegisterL1ValidatorTx` is defined as the SHA256 hash of the `Payload` of the `AddressedCall` in `Message`.

> When a `RegisterL1ValidatorTx` is accepted on the P-Chain, the Subnet Validator is added to the Subnet's validator set. A `minNonce` field corresponding to the `validationID` will be stored on addition to the validator set (initially set to `0`). This field will be used when validating the `SetL1ValidatorWeightTx` defined below.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When a `RegisterL1ValidatorTx` is accepted on the P-Chain, the validator is added to the L1's validator set. A `minNonce` field corresponding to the `validationID` will be stored on addition to the validator set (initially set to `0`). This field will be used when validating the `SetL1ValidatorWeightTx` defined below.
```

This `validationID` will be used for replay protection. Used `validationID`s will be stored on the P-Chain. If a `RegisterL1ValidatorTx`'s `validationID` has already been used, the transaction will be considered invalid. To prevent storing an unbounded number of `validationID`s, the `expiry` of the `RegisterL1ValidatorMessage` is required to be no more than 48 hours in the future of the time the transaction is issued on the P-Chain. Any `validationIDs` corresponding to an expired timestamp can be flushed from the P-Chain's state.

> Subnets are responsible for defining the procedure on how to retrieve the above information from prospective validators.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
L1s are responsible for defining the procedure on how to retrieve the above information from prospective validators.
```

    // below in `Message` for this validator.
    // Note: We do not enforce that the BLS key is unique across all validators.
    //       This means that validators can share a key if they so choose.

>     //       However, a NodeID + L1 does uniquely map to a BLS key

Reviewer: good catch!

    Message warp.Message `json:"message"`
}
```

The `validationID` of validators added via `RegisterL1ValidatorTx` is defined as the SHA256 hash of the `Payload` of the `AddressedCall` in `Message`.

When a `RegisterL1ValidatorTx` is accepted on the P-Chain, the validator is added to the L1's validator set. A `minNonce` field corresponding to the `validationID` will be stored on addition to the validator set (initially set to `0`). This field will be used when validating the `SetL1ValidatorWeightTx` defined below.

This `validationID` will be used for replay protection. Used `validationID`s will be stored on the P-Chain. If a `RegisterL1ValidatorTx`'s `validationID` has already been used, the transaction will be considered invalid. To prevent storing an unbounded number of `validationID`s, the `expiry` of the `RegisterL1ValidatorMessage` is required to be no more than 48 hours in the future of the time the transaction is issued on the P-Chain. Any `validationIDs` corresponding to an expired timestamp can be flushed from the P-Chain's state.

L1s are responsible for defining the procedure on how to retrieve the above information from prospective validators.

> A EVM-compatible L1 may choose to implement this step like so:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An EVM-compatible L1 may choose to implement this step like so:
```

> A Subnet-EVM based L1 may choose to implement this step like so:

Reviewer: It feels strange to me to call out Subnet-EVM in particular. This is generic for any EVM Subnet- what do you think about reverting?

```suggestion
An EVM Subnet may choose to implement this step like so:
```

Author: the language should apply only to L1s, as Subnets dont define their validator control logic, the pchain does.

Author: https://github.com/avalanche-foundation/ACPs/pull/154/files#r1816822953

- Use the number of tokens the user has staked into a smart contract on the L1 to determine the weight of their validator
- Require the user to submit an on-chain transaction with their validator information
- Generate the Warp message

For a `RegisterL1ValidatorTx` to be valid, `Signer` must be a valid proof-of-possession of the `blsPublicKey` defined in the `RegisterL1ValidatorMessage` contained in the transaction.

After a `RegisterL1ValidatorTx` is accepted, the P-Chain must be willing to sign a `L1ValidatorRegistrationMessage` for the given `validationID` with `registered` set to `true`. This remains the case until the time at which the validator is removed from the validator set using a `SetL1ValidatorWeightTx`, as described below.

> When it is known that a given `validationID` _is not and never will be_ registered, the P-Chain must be willing to sign a `L1ValidatorRegistrationMessage` for the `validationID` with `registered` set to `false`. This could be the case if the `expiry` time of the message has passed prior to the message being delivered in a `RegisterL1ValidatorTx`, or if the validator was successfully registered and then later removed. This enables the P-Chain to prove to validator managers that a validator has been removed or never added. The P-Chain must refuse to sign any `L1ValidatorRegistrationMessage` where the `validationID` does not correspond to an active validator and the `expiry` is in the future.

Reviewer: a `L1ValidatorRegistrationMessage` -> an `L1ValidatorRegistrationMessage`

(this should be applied in a few places)

#### `SetL1ValidatorWeightTx`

`SetL1ValidatorWeightTx` is used to modify the voting weight of a validator. The specification of this transaction is:

```golang
type SetL1ValidatorWeightTx struct {
    // Metadata, inputs and outputs
    BaseTx
    // An L1ValidatorWeightMessage payload
    Message warp.Message `json:"message"`
}
```

Applications of this transaction could include:

- Increase the voting weight of a validator if a delegation is made on the L1
- Increase the voting weight of a validator if the stake amount is increased (by staking rewards for example)
- Decrease the voting weight of a misbehaving validator
- Remove an inactive validator

The validation criteria for `L1ValidatorWeightMessage` is:

- `nonce >= minNonce`. Note that `nonce` is not required to be incremented by `1` with each successive validator weight update.
- When `minNonce == MaxUint64`, `nonce` must be `MaxUint64` and `weight` must be `0`. This prevents L1s from being unable to remove `nodeID` in a subsequent transaction.

> - If `weight == 0`, the validator being removed must not be the last one in the set. If all validators are removed, there are no valid Warp messages that can be produced to register new validators through `RegisterL1ValidatorMessage`. With no validators, block production will halt and the L1 is unrecoverable. This validation criteria serves as a guardrail against this situation. A future ACP can remove this guardrail as users get more familiar with the new L1 mechanics and tooling matures to fork an L1.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- If `weight == 0`, the validator being removed must not be the last one in the set. If all validators are removed, there are no valid Warp messages that can be produced to register new validators through `RegisterL1ValidatorMessage`. With no validators, block production will halt and the L1 is unrecoverable. This validation criteria serves as a guardrail against this situation. A future ACP can remove this guardrail as users get more familiar with the new L1 mechanics and tooling matures to fork a L1.
```

Author: > these indefinite articles are used [according to the sound](https://www.merriam-webster.com/grammar/is-it-a-or-an) that starts the following word, not the letter. So, we say “a dog” and “a balloon” or “an urgent message” and “an ant” but also “a useless pen” and “an hour.”

"L" said _out loud_ begins with a vowel sound; therefore the appropriate article is "an".
https://www.pristineword.com/a-an/#tit05

    //       This means that validators can share a key if they so choose.

>     //       However, a NodeID does uniquely map to a BLS key

Reviewer 2: To keep this comment consistent, should this also say `NodeID + L1`?

When it is known that a given `validationID` _is not and never will be_ registered, the P-Chain must be willing to sign a `L1ValidatorRegistrationMessage` for the `validationID` with `registered` set to `false`. This could be the case if the `expiry` time of the message has passed prior to the message being delivered in a `RegisterL1ValidatorTx`, or if the validator was successfully registered and then later removed. This enables the P-Chain to prove to validator managers that a validator has been removed or never added. The P-Chain must refuse to sign any `L1ValidatorRegistrationMessage` where the `validationID` does not correspond to an active validator and the `expiry` is in the future.

#### `SetL1ValidatorWeightTx`

`SetL1ValidatorWeightTx` is used to modify the voting weight of a validator. The specification of this transaction is:

```golang
type SetL1ValidatorWeightTx struct {
    // Metadata, inputs and outputs
    BaseTx

>     // A L1ValidatorWeightMessage payload

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    // An L1ValidatorWeightMessage payload
```

- Require the user to submit an on-chain transaction with their validator information
- Generate the Warp message

For a `RegisterL1ValidatorTx` to be valid, `Signer` must be a valid proof-of-possession of the `blsPublicKey` defined in the `RegisterL1ValidatorMessage` contained in the transaction.

> After a `RegisterL1ValidatorTx` is accepted, the P-Chain must be willing to sign a `L1ValidatorRegistrationMessage` for the given `validationID` with `registered` set to `true`. This remains the case until the time at which the Subnet Validator is removed from the validator set using a `SetL1ValidatorWeightTx`, as described below.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After a `RegisterL1ValidatorTx` is accepted, the P-Chain must be willing to sign a `L1ValidatorRegistrationMessage` for the given `validationID` with `registered` set to `true`. This remains the case until the time at which the validator is removed from the validator set using a `SetL1ValidatorWeightTx`, as described below.
```

> When it is known that a given `validationID` _is not and never will be_ an existing validation period for a Subnet, the P-Chain must be willing to sign a `L1ValidatorRegistrationMessage` for the `validationID` with `registered` set to `false`. This could be the case if the `expiry` time of the message has passed prior to the message being delivered in a `RegisterL1ValidatorTx`, or if the Subnet Validator was successfully registered and then later removed. This enables the P-Chain to prove to validator managers that a validator has been removed or never added. The P-Chain must refuse to sign any `L1ValidatorRegistrationMessage` where the `validationID` does not correspond to an active validator and the `expiry` is in the future.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When it is known that a given `validationID` _is not and never will be_ registered, the P-Chain must be willing to sign a `L1ValidatorRegistrationMessage` for the `validationID` with `registered` set to `false`. This could be the case if the `expiry` time of the message has passed prior to the message being delivered in a `RegisterL1ValidatorTx`, or if the validator was successfully registered and then later removed. In all other cases, the P-Chain must refuse to sign the `L1ValidatorRegistrationMessage` message. This enables the P-Chain to prove to validator managers that a validator has been removed or never added.
```

#### `SetL1ValidatorWeightTx`

> `SetL1ValidatorWeightTx` is used to modify the voting weight of a Subnet Validator. The specification of this transaction is:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`SetL1ValidatorWeightTx` is used to modify the voting weight of a validator. The specification of this transaction is:
```

> - Decrease the voting weight of a misbehaving Subnet Validator

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Decrease the voting weight of a misbehaving validator
```

> - Remove an inactive Subnet Validator

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Remove an inactive validator
```

The validation criteria for `L1ValidatorWeightMessage` is:

- `nonce >= minNonce`. Note that `nonce` is not required to be incremented by `1` with each successive validator weight update.

> - When `minNonce == MaxUint64`, `nonce` must be `MaxUint64` and `weight` must be `0`. This prevents Subnets from being unable to remove `nodeID` in a subsequent transaction.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- When `minNonce == MaxUint64`, `nonce` must be `MaxUint64` and `weight` must be `0`. This prevents L1s from being unable to remove `nodeID` in a subsequent transaction.
```

> - If `weight == 0`, the Subnet Validator being removed must not be the last one in the set. If all Subnet Validators are removed, there are no valid Warp messages that can be produced to register new Subnet Validators through `RegisterL1ValidatorMessage`. With no validators, block production will halt and the Subnet is unrecoverable. This validation criteria serves as a guardrail against this situation. A future ACP can remove this guardrail as users get more familiar with the new Subnet mechanics and tooling matures to fork a Subnet.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- If `weight == 0`, the validator being removed must not be the last one in the set. If all validators are removed, there are no valid Warp messages that can be produced to register new validators through `RegisterL1ValidatorMessage`. With no validators, block production will halt and the L1 is unrecoverable. This validation criteria serves as a guardrail against this situation. A future ACP can remove this guardrail as users get more familiar with the new L1 mechanics and tooling matures to fork an L1.
```

> When `weight != 0`, the weight of the Subnet Validator is updated to `weight` and `minNonce` is updated to `nonce + 1`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When `weight != 0`, the weight of the validator is updated to `weight` and `minNonce` is updated to `nonce + 1`.
```

Note: The $AVAX added to `Balance` can be claimed at any time by the validator using `DisableL1ValidatorTx`.

### Bootstrapping L1 Nodes

Bootstrapping a node/validator is the process of securely recreating the latest state of the blockchain locally. At the end of this process, the local state of a node/validator must be in sync with the local state of other virtuous nodes/validators. The node/validator can then verify new incoming transactions and reach consensus with other nodes/validators.

To bootstrap a node/validator, a few critical questions must be answered: How does one discover peers in the network? How does one determine that a discovered peer is honestly participating in the network?

For standalone networks like the Avalanche Primary Network, this is done by connecting to a hardcoded [set](https://github.com/ava-labs/avalanchego/blob/master/genesis/bootstrappers.json) of trusted bootstrappers to then discover new peers. Ethereum calls their set [bootnodes](https://ethereum.org/developers/docs/nodes-and-clients/bootnodes).

> By separating L1 validators from Primary Network validators, a list of validator IPs to connect to (the functional bootstrappers of the L1) is no longer provided by simply connecting to the Primary Network validators. However, the Primary Network can enable nodes tracking an L1 to seamlessly connect to the validators by tracking and gossiping validator IPs. L1s will not need to operate and maintain a set of bootstrappers and can continue to rely on the Primary Network for peer discovery.

Author: ```suggestion
Since L1 validators are not required to be Primary Network validators, a list of validator IPs to connect to (the functional bootstrappers of the L1) cannot be provided by simply connecting to the Primary Network validators. However, the Primary Network can enable nodes tracking an L1 to seamlessly connect to the validators by tracking and gossiping L1 validator IPs. L1s will not need to operate and maintain a set of bootstrappers and can rely on the Primary Network for peer discovery.
```

### Sidebar: L1 Sovereignty

After this ACP is activated, the P-Chain will no longer support staking of any assets other than $AVAX for the Primary Network. The P-Chain will not support the distribution of staking rewards for L1s. All staking-related operations for L1 validation must be managed by the L1's validator manager. The P-Chain simply requires a continuous fee per validator. If an L1 would like to manage their validator's balances on the P-Chain, it can cover the cost for all L1 validators by posting the $AVAX balance on the P-Chain. L1s can implement any mechanism they want to pay the continuous fee charged by the P-Chain for its participants.

> By moving ownership of the L1's validator set from the P-Chain to the L1, L1 creators have no restrictions on what requirements they have to join their L1 as a validator. Any stake that is required to join the L1's validator set is locked on the L1. If a validator is removed from the L1's validator set via a `SetL1ValidatorWeightTx` with weight `0`, the stake on the L1 will continue to be locked. How each L1 handles stake associated with the validator is entirely left up to the L1 and can be treated independently to what happens on the P-Chain.

Reviewer: we aren't technically moving ownership

```suggestion
The L1 has full ownership over its validator set, not the P-Chain. There are no restrictions on what requirements an L1 can have for validators to join. Any stake that is required to join the L1's validator set is not locked on the P-Chain. If a validator is removed from the L1's validator set via a `SetL1ValidatorWeightTx` with weight `0`, the stake will continue to be locked outside of the P-Chain. How each L1 handles stake associated with the validator is entirely left up to the L1 and can be treated independently to what happens on the P-Chain.
```

> This new relationship between the P-Chain and L1s provides a dynamic where L1s can use the P-Chain as an impartial judge to modify parameters (in addition to its existing role of helping to validate incoming Avalanche Warp Messages). If a validator is misbehaving, the L1 validators can collectively generate a BLS multisig to reduce the voting weight of a misbehaving validator. This operation is fully secured by the Avalanche Primary Network (225M $AVAX or $8.325B at the time of writing).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The relationship between the P-Chain and L1s provides a dynamic where L1s can use the P-Chain as an impartial judge to modify parameters (in addition to its existing role of helping to validate incoming Avalanche Warp Messages). If a validator is misbehaving, the L1 validators can collectively generate a BLS multisig to reduce the voting weight of a misbehaving validator. This operation is fully secured by the Avalanche Primary Network (225M $AVAX or $8.325B at the time of writing).
```

Note: The $AVAX added to `Balance` can be claimed at any time by the validator using `DisableL1ValidatorTx`.

### Bootstrapping L1 Nodes

Bootstrapping a node/validator is the process of securely recreating the latest state of the blockchain locally. At the end of this process, the local state of a node/validator must be in sync with the local state of other virtuous nodes/validators. The node/validator can then verify new incoming transactions and reach consensus with other nodes/validators.

To bootstrap a node/validator, a few critical questions must be answered: How does one discover peers in the network? How does one determine that a discovered peer is honestly participating in the network?

For standalone networks like the Avalanche Primary Network, this is done by connecting to a hardcoded [set](https://github.com/ava-labs/avalanchego/blob/master/genesis/bootstrappers.json) of trusted bootstrappers to then discover new peers. Ethereum calls their set [bootnodes](https://ethereum.org/developers/docs/nodes-and-clients/bootnodes).

> By separating L1 validators from Primary Network validators, a list of validator IPs to connect to (the functional bootstrappers of the L1) is no longer provided by simply connecting to the Primary Network validators. However, the Primary Network can enable nodes tracking an L1 to seamlessly connect to the validators by tracking and gossiping validator IPs. L1s will not need to operate and maintain a set of bootstrappers and can continue to rely on the Primary Network for peer discovery.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since L1 validators are not required to be Primary Network validators, a list of validator IPs to connect to (the functional bootstrappers of the L1) cannot be provided by simply connecting to the Primary Network validators. However, the Primary Network can enable nodes tracking a L1 to seamlessly connect to the validators by tracking and gossiping L1 validator IPs. L1s will not need to operate and maintain a set of bootstrappers and can rely on the Primary Network for peer discovery.
```

Author: https://github.com/avalanche-foundation/ACPs/pull/154/files#r1816820001 same change excluding `a L1`

### Sidebar: L1 Sovereignty

> After this ACP is activated, the P-Chain will no longer support staking of any assets other than $AVAX for the Primary Network. The P-Chain will not support the distribution of staking rewards for L1s. All staking-related operations for L1 validation must be managed by the L1's validator manager. The P-Chain simply requires a continuous fee per validator. If an L1 would like to manage their validator's balances on the P-Chain, it can cover the cost for all L1 validators by posting the $AVAX balance on the P-Chain. L1s can implement any mechanism they want to pay the continuous fee charged by the P-Chain for its participants.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After this ACP is activated, the P-Chain will no longer support staking of any assets other than $AVAX for the Primary Network. The P-Chain will not support the distribution of staking rewards for L1s. All staking-related operations for L1s must be managed by the L1's validator manager. The P-Chain simply requires a continuous fee per validator. If a L1 would like to manage their validator's balances on the P-Chain, it can cover the cost for all L1 validators by posting the $AVAX balance on the P-Chain. L1s can implement any mechanism they want to pay the continuous fee charged by the P-Chain for its participants.
```

> By moving ownership of the L1's validator set from the P-Chain to the L1, L1 creators have no restrictions on what requirements they have to join their L1 as a validator. Any stake that is required to join the L1's validator set is locked on the L1. If a validator is removed from the L1's validator set via a `SetL1ValidatorWeightTx` with weight `0`, the stake on the L1 will continue to be locked. How each L1 handles stake associated with the validator is entirely left up to the L1 and can be treated independently to what happens on the P-Chain.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Ownership of the L1's validator set is on the L1 itself, and not on the P-Chain. There are no restrictions on what requirements a L1 can have for validators to join. Any stake that is required to join the L1's validator set is not locked on the P-Chain. If a validator is removed from the L1's validator set via a `SetL1ValidatorWeightTx` with weight `0`, the stake will continue to be locked outside of the P-Chain. How each L1 handles stake associated with the validator is entirely left up to the L1 and can be treated independently to what happens on the P-Chain.
```

> This new relationship between the P-Chain and L1s provides a dynamic where L1s can use the P-Chain as an impartial judge to modify parameters (in addition to its existing role of helping to validate incoming Avalanche Warp Messages). If a validator is misbehaving, the L1 validators can collectively generate a BLS multisig to reduce the voting weight of a misbehaving validator. This operation is fully secured by the Avalanche Primary Network (225M $AVAX or $8.325B at the time of writing).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This relationship between the P-Chain and L1s provides a dynamic where L1s can use the P-Chain as an impartial judge to modify parameters (in addition to its existing role of helping to validate incoming Avalanche Warp Messages). If a validator is misbehaving, the L1 validators can collectively generate a BLS multisig to reduce the voting weight of a misbehaving validator. This operation is fully secured by the Avalanche Primary Network (225M $AVAX or $8.325B at the time of writing).
```

Since each L1 validator is charged the same amount at each point in time, tracking the fees for the entire validator set is straight-forward. The accumulated dynamic base fee for the entire network is tracked in a single uint. This accumulated value should be equal to the fee charged if a validator was active from the time the accumulator was instantiated. The validator set is maintained in a priority queue. A pseudocode implementation of the continuous fee mechanism is provided below.

```python
# Pseudocode

> class validatorQueue:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
class ValidatorQueue:
```

                continue
            return

>     # validator was added

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    # Validator was added
```

    def validator_enter(self, vdr):
        vdr.balance = vdr.balance + self.acc
        self.queue.add(vdr)

>     # validator was removed

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    # Validator was removed
```

    def validator_remove(self, vdrNodeID):
        vdr = find_and_remove(self.queue, vdrNodeID)
        vdr.balance = vdr.balance - self.acc
        vdr.refund() # Refund [vdr.balance] to [RemainingBalanceOwner]
        self.queue.remove()

>     # validator's balance was topped up

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    # Validator's balance was topped up
```

The parameters at activation are:

| Parameter | Value                            |
| --------- | -------------------------------- |
| $T$       | `TODO` Subnet Validators         |

> | $C$       | `TODO` Subnet Validators         |

Author: yes definitely

The parameters at activation are:

| Parameter | Value                            |
| --------- | -------------------------------- |
| $T$       | `TODO` L1 validators             |
| $C$       | `TODO` L1 validators             |
| $M$       | `TODO` nAVAX/s (`TODO` AVAX/day) |
| $K$       | `TODO`                           |

A future ACP can adjust the parameters to increase $T$, reduce $M$, and/or modify $K$.

#### User Experience

> Instead of a fixed up-front cost of 2000 $AVAX, L1 validators are now continuously charged a fee, albeit a small one. This poses a new challenge for L1 validators: How do they maintain the balance?

Reviewer: I think this needs to be changed, "now" implies they were charged it before.

```suggestion
L1 validators are continuously charged a fee, albeit a small one. This poses a challenge for L1 validators: How do they maintain the balance over time?
```

With a long window of expiry (48 hours) for the Warp message in `RegisterL1ValidatorTx`, spam of validator registration could lead to high memory pressure on the P-Chain. A future ACP can reduce the window of expiry if 48 hours proves to be a problem.

NodeIDs can be added to an L1's validator set involuntarily. However, it is important to note that any stake/rewards are _not_ at risk. For a node operator who was added to a validator set involuntarily, they would only need to generate a new NodeID via key rotation as there is no lock-up of any stake to create a NodeID. This is an explicit tradeoff for easier on-boarding of NodeIDs. This mirrors the Primary Network validators guarantee of no stake/rewards at risk.

The continuous fee mechanism outlined above does not apply to inactive L1 validators since they are not stored in memory. However, inactive L1 validators are persisted on disk which can lead to persistent P-Chain state growth. A future ACP can introduce a mechanism to decrease the rate of P-Chain state growth or provide a state expiry path to reduce the amount of P-Chain state.

> 

Reviewer: extra space

```suggestion
```

With a long window of expiry (48 hours) for the Warp message in `RegisterL1ValidatorTx`, spam of validator registration could lead to high memory pressure on the P-Chain. A future ACP can reduce the window of expiry if 48 hours proves to be a problem.

NodeIDs can be added to an L1's validator set involuntarily. However, it is important to note that any stake/rewards are _not_ at risk. For a node operator who was added to a validator set involuntarily, they would only need to generate a new NodeID via key rotation as there is no lock-up of any stake to create a NodeID. This is an explicit tradeoff for easier on-boarding of NodeIDs. This mirrors the Primary Network validators guarantee of no stake/rewards at risk.

The continuous fee mechanism outlined above does not apply to inactive L1 validators since they are not stored in memory. However, inactive L1 validators are persisted on disk which can lead to persistent P-Chain state growth. A future ACP can introduce a mechanism to decrease the rate of P-Chain state growth or provide a state expiry path to reduce the amount of P-Chain state.

> There are currently no open questions.

Author: ```suggestion
```

The parameters at activation are:

| Parameter | Value                            |
| --------- | -------------------------------- |
| $T$       | `TODO` L1 validators             |
| $C$       | `TODO` L1 validators             |
| $M$       | `TODO` nAVAX/s (`TODO` AVAX/day) |
| $K$       | `TODO`                           |

A future ACP can adjust the parameters to increase $T$, reduce $M$, and/or modify $K$.

#### User Experience

> Instead of a fixed up-front cost of 2000 $AVAX, L1 validators are now continuously charged a fee, albeit a small one. This poses a new challenge for L1 validators: How do they maintain the balance?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
L1 validators are continuously charged a fee, albeit a small one. This poses a challenge for L1 validators: How do they maintain the balance over time?
```

Any state execution changes must be coordinated through a mandatory upgrade. Implementors must take care to continue to verify the existing ruleset until the upgrade is activated. After activation, nodes should verify the new ruleset. Implementors must take care to only verify the presence of 2000 $AVAX prior to activation.

### Deactivated Transactions

- P-Chain

  - `TransformSubnetTx`

    After this ACP is activated, Elastic Subnets will be disabled. `TransformSubnetTx` will not be accepted post-activation. As there are no Mainnet Elastic Subnets, there should be no production impact with this deactivation.

### New Transactions

- P-Chain
  - `ConvertSubnetToL1Tx`
  - `RegisterL1ValidatorTx`
  - `SetL1ValidatorWeightTx`
  - `DisableL1ValidatorTx`
  - `IncreaseL1ValidatorBalanceTx`

## Reference Implementation

A full reference implementation has not been provided yet. It will be provided once this ACP is considered `Implementable`.

## Security Considerations

> This ACP significantly reduces the cost of becoming an L1 validator. This can lead to a large increase in the number of L1 validators going forward. Each additional validator adds consistent RAM usage to the P-Chain. However, this should be appropriately metered by the continuous fee mechanism outlined above.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This ACP introduces Avalanche Layer 1s, a new network type that costs significantly less from Avalanche Subnets. This can lead to a large increase in the number of networks and, by extension, the number of validators. Each additional validator adds consistent RAM usage to the P-Chain. However, this should be appropriately metered by the continuous fee mechanism outlined above.
```

> With the additional sovereignty L1s gain from the P-Chain, staking tokens are no longer locked on the P-Chain. This poses a new security consideration for L1 validators: Malicious chains can choose to remove validators at will and take any funds that the validator has on the L1. The P-Chain only provides the guarantee that L1 validators can retrieve the remaining $AVAX Balance for their validator via a `DisableL1ValidatorTx`. Any assets on the L1 is entirely under the purview of the L1. The onus is now on L1 validators to vet the L1's security.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With the sovereignty L1s have from the P-Chain, staking tokens are not locked on the P-Chain. This poses a security consideration for L1 validators: Malicious chains can choose to remove validators at will and take any funds that the validator has locked on the L1. The P-Chain only provides the guarantee that L1 validators can retrieve the remaining $AVAX Balance for their validator via a `DisableL1ValidatorTx`. Any assets on the L1 is entirely under the purview of the L1. The onus is on L1 validators to vet the L1's security for any assets transferred onto the L1.
```

> With the additional sovereignty L1s gain from the P-Chain, Subnet staking tokens are no longer locked on the P-Chain for Permissionless Subnets. This poses a new security consideration for L1 validators: Malicious chains can choose to remove validators at will and take any funds that the validator has on the L1. The P-Chain only provides the guarantee that L1 validators can retrieve the remaining $AVAX Balance for their validator via a `DisableL1ValidatorTx`. Any assets on the L1 is entirely under the purview of the L1. The onus is now on L1 validators to vet the L1's security.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
With the additional sovereignty L1s gain from the P-Chain, staking tokens are no longer locked on the P-Chain. This poses a new security consideration for L1 validators: Malicious chains can choose to remove validators at will and take any funds that the validator has on the L1. The P-Chain only provides the guarantee that L1 validators can retrieve the remaining $AVAX Balance for their validator via a `DisableL1ValidatorTx`. Any assets on the L1 is entirely under the purview of the L1. The onus is now on L1 validators to vet the L1's security.
```

With a long window of expiry (48 hours) for the Warp message in `RegisterL1ValidatorTx`, spam of validator registration could lead to high memory pressure on the P-Chain. A future ACP can reduce the window of expiry if 48 hours proves to be a problem.

> NodeIDs can be added to an L1's validator set involuntarily. However, it is important to note that any stake/rewards are _not_ at risk. For a node operator who was added to a validator set involuntarily, they would only need to generate a new NodeID via key rotation as there is no lock-up of any stake to create a NodeID. This is an explicit tradeoff for easier on-boarding of NodeIDs. This mirrors the Primary Network validators guarantee of no stake/rewards at risk.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
NodeIDs can be added to a L1's validator set involuntarily. However, it is important to note that any stake/rewards are _not_ at risk. For a node operator who was added to a validator set involuntarily, they would only need to generate a new NodeID via key rotation as there is no lock-up of any stake to create a NodeID. This is an explicit tradeoff for easier on-boarding of NodeIDs. This mirrors the Primary Network validators guarantee of no stake/rewards at risk.
```

Author: > these indefinite articles are used [according to the sound](https://www.merriam-webster.com/grammar/is-it-a-or-an) that starts the following word, not the letter. So, we say “a dog” and “a balloon” or “an urgent message” and “an ant” but also “a useless pen” and “an hour.”

"L" said _out loud_ begins with a vowel sound; therefore the appropriate article is "an".
https://www.pristineword.com/a-an/#tit05

> The continuous fee mechanism outlined above does not apply to inactive L1 validators since they are not stored in memory. However, inactive L1 validators are persisted on disk which can lead to persistent P-Chain state growth. The initial balance requirement (the greater of 5 $AVAX or two weeks of the current fee) should be a sufficient deterrent as it must be fully burned for the validator to become inactive. A future ACP can increase the initial balance to decrease the rate of P-Chain state growth or provide a state expiry path to reduce the amount of P-Chain state.

Reviewer 2: Also not related to the rename, but we should clean this up (either in this PR or a followup)
```suggestion
The continuous fee mechanism outlined above does not apply to inactive L1 validators since they are not stored in memory. However, inactive L1 validators are persisted on disk which can lead to persistent P-Chain state growth. A future ACP can introduce a mechanism to decrease the rate of P-Chain state growth or provide a state expiry path to reduce the amount of P-Chain state.
```

### Should they still be called Subnets?

> Going forward, Subnets should be referred to as L1s. Unlike layer 2 blockchains, layer 1 blockchains operate independently without relying on other systems for their core functions. They manage their own consensus mechanisms, transaction processing, and security protocols directly within their own networks. Subnets have always operated this way. With the added functionality introduced in this ACP, they are clearly standalone networks, or L1s.

Reviewer 3: I think it could be worth mentioning the fact that L1 validator sets creating using the new ACP-77 flow will not be a subset of the primary network validator set, making it technically incorrect to call them Subnets.

This is neither here or there, and I see the note in the abstract also, but feel like this explanation belongs more in "motivation" since it is no longer an open question IMO

Author: my original pr included it as the first part of the motivation, but @dhrubabasu disagrees. I've linked it in line 19 but am open to moving it
